## Sparkify ETL and Postgres Database

### Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

An ETL pipeline and Postgres database has been designed to load data and optimize queries on song play analysis. 

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator https://github.com/Interana/eventsim based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

### Purpose and Schema
Basic information such as user, song and artist information comprise the functional data needed for customer and order management. Further than that Sparkify will likey employ machine learning recommender systems to recommend next songs / playlists / genres to the customer to keep them on their platform rather than turning to a competitor. There are many ways this could be done such as explicit ratings that customers could give to songs, ratings based on frequency of songs / types of songs played or more sophisticated methods such as content and knowledge based recommnder systems. Clustering algorithms could be used to segment customers into different demograhpics to determine optimal timing for promotions and offers. All of this require that the data be stored, easily assesible and queried. For example using the song, artist and duration fields as a link to match songid and artist_id allows data to be stored in the songplay table in a format already ready for analysis.

### ETL pipeline
The ETL pipeline is designed to be able to import json files and insert into the database one at a time. Depending on the number of customers using the system, there will likely be thousands, or even millions of songs being played at any one time so a constant streaming flow of data written to the database will likely be necessary.

### TABLES:
#### Songs
Contains data related specifically to the songs in the database
* song_id
* title
* artist_id
* year
* duration

#### Artists
Contains data only related to the artists in the database
* artist_id
* artist_name
* location
* latitude
* longitude

#### Time
Contains timestamps and time units broken down into varying units.
* time_stamp
* hour
* day
* week
* year
* weekday

#### Users
Data on the users in the app
* user_id
* firstname
* lastname
* gender
* level

#### Songplays
Records in the log files associated with song plays.
* time_stamp
* user_id
* level
* song_id
* artist_id
* session_id
* location

### Files
* Folder 'data' - contains all raw json data files
* create_tables.py - Creates and connects to the sparkify database dropping any pre-existing tables before recreating new empty tables
* sql_queries.py - list of the various queries that will be used by etl.ipynb and etl.py
* etl.ipynb - Jupyter notebook walking through the extract transform and load logic step by step
* etl.py - ETL pipeline that will load all data files into the respective tables

### Instructions
Run etl.py to directly load data into the postgres database "sparkify".

Postgres connection parameters: <br>
database="sparkify", <br>
user="postgres", <br>
password="postgres", <br>
host="localhost" <br>
port='5432' <br>



